---
layout: post
title: "Musings on Coming Out, Part 1"
date: 2024-03-02
<<<<<<< HEAD
tags: [gender]
excerpt: "Part the First: Coming out to myself"
---

[One year ago today](https://www.instagram.com/p/CpSOTeAs0Oh/), inasmuch as I had nobody else in my life left to tell, I finally "finished" coming out. 366 days later, I wanted to document some of my thoughts and feelings from the experience, how it went, what I might do differently had I the chance to do it again, and just leave a record of my experience.

## Setting the scene
The most important part of any coming out story is the moment you allow yourself to say the words to yourself and mean it. Many queer people struggle with even this initial first step due to internalised trans and/or homophobia, and years-to-decades of repression. For my part, I had been uncomfortable with my assigned gender and body since I had been a teenager, and struggled to relate to many of my contemporaries at school from an even younger age. The earliest memory I have of being told to not behave like such a girl was at school, aged 5. I had burst into tears in response to a sort of charades game in which someone had to pretend to stop being my friend. Later that day at lunch I was teased mercilessly for this lapse in masculinity.

When I was young and still sharing a bedroom with my younger sister she had a book called [The Toilet of Doom](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Toilet-Doom-Jiggy-McCue-Story/dp/1841217522) in which the male protagonist swaps bodies with one of his best friends, who just happens to be a girl. All sorts of hilarity and hijinks ensue, and ultimately they get swapped back. I read and reread this book, fascinated by the segment during which Jiggy has Angie's body, and was always disappointed when the story remained the same and they were able to switch back. I don't remember thinking anything specific of that at the time, and I guess I just associated it with the usual sense of loss one feels when finishing a beloved story. If I had an earlier exposure to the concept of genderbending fiction, I do not remember it.

I have had many aborted attempts at exploring my gender expression over the years. I would try out feminine clothing, hair, and makeup until it all became too much for me and I would purge  all of the accumulated paraphernalia as I put that part of my brain back in a locked box, seemingly dealt with and silenced. Probably 90-95% of this exploration was a solo endeavour, and the few times I did engage with my identity with another person (romantic partners on all occasions), it was quickly shut down. I was petrified of the word "transgender" and thought of myself as a cross-dresser, or perhaps someone with a very particular kink. Given the consistent solitude of my voyages of self-discovery, there was a large sexual dimension to the process. It wasn't until later that I would learn that this is a [very](https://genderdysphoria.fyi/en/am-i-trans#consider-that-it-s-rarely-just-a-fetish) [common](https://medium.com/@kemenatan/its-just-a-fetish-right-91cb0a4e261) [experience](https://stainedglasswoman.substack.com/p/beneath-the-surface) amongst trans people.

## A button on a desert island
In the trans community, eggs (the affectionate term given to trans people who have yet to "hatch") are constantly seeking out resources to try and understand the complicated feelings they are experiencing. There are a wealth of communities on the Internet dedicated to helping burgeoning trans people identify what they're feeling and answer the question "could I be transgender?" I found many such communities and threw myself into them with abandon, desperate for understanding. I understand _now_ that I was in fact looking for permission to transition. For someone to tell me that I was allowed to do this. And maybe to say it would all work out in the end.

One of the simplest tools in the arsenal of the egg trying to work out if they want to hatch is [The Button Test](https://www.erininthemorning.com/p/the-button-test-how-a-button-press). Not a psychological or diagnostic tool, but a thought experiment designed to prompt the taker into thinking properly about what their assigned gender means to them, and how they would feel about changing it. It boils down to this set of six questions (paraphrased from Erin's article linked above. Seriously, go and read that):

1. You are given a button to press. If you press it, you will become physically female. All of your family and friends will have always remembered you this way and you will have no social impacts to your life for making this decision. Once you press the button, it will disappear forever. Do you press the button?
2. Another button appears. Instead of changing your physical form, this one would alter your mind so that you no longer wish to be female. You will forget about the button and it will disappear forever. Do you press the button?
3. You are stranded on a desert island which has everything you need on it to live in relative comfort. Several suitcases wash ashore with all kinds of different clothes, makeup, etc. How do you present yourself knowing nobody will ever be around to see you ever again?
4. A lifetime supply of hormones washes on shore with full instructions on how to safely use them. Do you take the hormones?
5. Suppose I told you this test was perfect, and it said that you are 100% transgender. How would that make you feel?
6. What if I told you the test said you are NOT transgender, how would _that_ make you feel?

I first came across these questions in 2018. I was in a period of change in my life, having just moved into a shared house with a bunch of people I had never met before. I hot off a breakup, and I was feeling generally pretty rubbish, and I turned as I so often did to thoughts of becoming a woman. And for the first time, I actually engaged with the idea of being trans. I reasoned that I couldn't possibly be trans, I didn't feel dysphoria. I was just depressed and exhausted all the time. But that was just life being a bit challenging for the last few years. Nothing gender related at all.

I went to Reddit and found many accounts of people realising that they're trans, but I found every possible way to reject their applicability to myself. I was different for any of a dozen reasons. During that time I came across a website: [Turn Me Into A Girl](https://turn-me-into-agirl.com/). Was this it? Was this my Toilet of Doom? Had I found The Button from question one? I eagerly followed the link, clicked the button, and… nothing. I wasn't transformed. I was still just me. Nothing in my brain changed, nothing in my body changed. The words on the screen said I was now a girl, but I didn't feel any differently. The only feeling I had was disappointment, that I had not been transformed as I hoped. It seems slightly ridiculous to me now, and I'm sure it seems baffling to you as well, dear reader. But for a second there my hopes were well and truly up. And then dashed once again.

In disgust and frustration, I closed that browser tab, and every other browser tab I had open pertaining to my gender. I got rid of clothes and nail polish. I purged, and put all of those complicated feelings back inside their box, now labelled "impossible."

## Drugs
My relationship with drugs has always been complicated. I spent a long portion of my twenties smoking a lot of weed and drinking a lot of alcohol. It was an escape from the misery I felt at being thrown into adult life after university, and not really feeling able to keep my chin above the surface of the water. I had a particularly difficult relationship with weed. There were weeks and months at a time where scarcely a night went by without my lighting up at least one joint. It was a numbing agent, and an escape from a lot of the pain I was feeling, not just around gender.

Frequent bids to stop smoking as much weed failed constantly. In a few of my longer stretches of managing to curtail my smoking, bouts of gender exploration would arise. I never took this to mean anything other than them both being coping mechanisms for my depression, and certainly not the drugs being used to numb the dysphoria.

## Lockdown
The world conspired to shut itself away for a few months in 2020, and I revelled in the emptiness of my calendar and the relative solitude (such as you can have in a shared home) of working remotely. That first lockdown was undeniably a good experience for me. I spent a lot of time working on music, learning and writing new songs. I burned through a backlog of games and books. I played roleplaying games online. I had virtual nights at the pub with friends that I hadn't seen since long before the pandemic. In short, I was loving it.

The vast majority of the pressure of the outside world just melted away. And I was left to myself. My thoughts. My desert island. _You are stranded on a desert island._ Suddenly I barely had to think about the expectations of the outside world, and I could just think about myself. The disquiet about my gender returned, and I found myself also returning to those online haunts where I had talked to other trans folks about their experiences. It was still just impossible though. I couldn't hope to transform (I was still petrified of the word transition) into a woman. That's not how the world worked. I found myself returning to the [Button](https://turn-me-into-agirl.com/) again and again, frustrated and saddened by its complete lack of magical powers.

And yet, the box didn't want to close any more. I couldn't stop the thoughts from manifesting, and my once brilliant ability to compartmentalise was compromised. I didn't have constant access to the substances I used to use to distract from the fear, uncertainy, and doubt. And so I spent more and more time reading about transition, and learned what dysphoria truly was, and all of the different ways it can manifest. And even though the box was well and truly open now, the great big "impossible" label was still present as well. The more I read about transition and how the physical effects (which at this stage was what I was mainly concerned with) grew more and more limited the older one started.

## Just like me
In a similar way to the idea that our personalities are made up of those of our five closest friends, in this modern world of parasocial relationships, I suppose we find ourselves drawn to creators and artists who we relate to in some way. We don't always know what it is that draws us to them, other than we appreciate their art. Maybe we see something of ourselves in them.

I won't name any names here, as it's not my place to out anyone, somewhat public figures or not. But in very rapid succession there were a number of people whose work I admired and had long felt a kinship with (though I had never once met any of them) who all came out as transgender within a year of each other. One after another these people who had touched my life in a fairly significant way, in some cases for _years_, all revealed this truth about themselves. It's hard to describe the massive effect that all of these comings out had on my psyche. It unlocked another level of introspection for myself, and all of a sudden that "impossible" label could, in certain lights, be read as "possible?"

The gratitude I feel for those men and women for publicly coming out, as well as the thousands of others who had documented and left records of their own transition is slightly overwhelming. Without their stories, I would never have felt enabled to engage with my own. Without all of that defiance in the face of prejudice and transphobia, I don't know that I would be writing this right now. Without all of that sense of siblinghood, I might not be here today.

## Resistence is futile
In April of 2021 I was experimenting with meditation. My partner and I had been engaged together in challenges each for a month at a time: veganuary, draw something, write something, going dry, and so on. We were both feeling a little stressed (we were living through a pandemic after all), and so we opted to try meditation. I don't think I ever got the hang of letting my mind go blank. However, I did find myself benefitting from giving myself a dedicated space and time in which to sit with my thoughts, something which an increasingly less locked-down world was reducing my opportunity for as bands and hobbies began to reassert their demands.

For two weeks I had taken 30 minutes every day to sit and simply think. My thoughts wandered all over, but there was one particular theme that I kept coming back to: gender. And this time I explored it from an almost third person perspective, like a curious researcher, rather than an intronaut into my own experience of the world. I entertained different possibilities for exploring more feminine presentations in ways that felt safe. Being in bands provided excellent opportunities for being a little more feminine, behind the plausible deniability of it being part of the stage show.[^1][^2]

For no particular occasion or reason, my partner, my friends, and I got high that evening. Perhaps it was for want of anything better to do. It's hard to remember the specifics of that evening through the haze of marijuana, but I do recall that my gender wasn't even remotely at the forefront of my mind. I don't remember sensing an impending paradigm shift, and I certainly didn't plan to come out that evening, to myself or anyone else. But, lying in bed with my partner coming down from yet another weed high, my mind was racing. I will write another time about the less than soporific effects that weed often had on my mind, but this was certainly one of those times. The words of my heroes were reverberating around my head. The thoughts I had been unintentionally exploring in meditation were coming together. And in the arms of my partner, lying under warm lamplight and with music softly playing in the background, I cried. For what felt like the first time in my life, I cried. The feelings were too much for me to contain any longer, and whether or not that damn box said "impossible," "possible," or anything else, the single, loaded word that the box contained was clear to me at last as something that I had to engage with. Through the tears and to a very concerned partner, I finally said the word that I had been terrified of for such a long time.

Transgender.

[^1]: My therapist suggested something similar to me when I came out to him.
[^2]: And indeed, my parents said that they thought my changing sense of style was simply down to the eccentricities involved with being a musician.
