---
layout: post
title: "Musings on Coming Out, Part 2"
date: 2024-03-25
tags: [gender]
excerpt: "Part the Second: Coming out to my partner"
---

In Part One I talked inarticulately about the intronautic journey I undertook to come to the conclusion that I am in fact, transgender. This time around I want to talk about coming out to my (then) partner. I am now no longer in a relationship with that person, and so to preserve their anonymity I'll just be referring to them by their initial, C. There is a lot that I could say in this post, but not all of it is appropriate to share, so this may be less introspective and more narrative in content. But this relationship and its eventual demise was a keystone part of me finally coming all the way out, and I think the context is important.

## Don't make a dick joke
If I have one piece of advice for anyone whose partner comes out as a trans woman, it would be that at all costs, do no let your first response be a joke (however humorous or lighthearted) about mourning the loss of your partner's penis. It took me weeks to work up the courage to talk to C about that remark, ad while they confirmed that it was indeed just a joke, it caused me a lot of consternation while I grappled with it. It felt like the person I was completely in love with, with whom I had just entrusted a secret that I hadn't ever dared even say to myself, was giving me an ultimatum.

With that aside, C was a wonderful person to have around me while I first started to explore my gender more openly. There were of course some initial teething problems. The rapidity with which I wanted to start trying new things was a bit much for C. I was extremely excited to get to trying new things like pronouns and names and clothes, and I think it frightened them how quickly I seemed to be changing. We spent a lot of time together talking about transition and what it meant for me and for us as a couple, but disagreements were rare. If anything, C seemed just as enthusiastic as I was to explore this "new" side of me. They were doing a lot of their own reading and learning, and suggesting resources for me to read or watch, outfits or hairstyles I might want to try. Almost immediately I realised how much of a burden the prospect of rejection had been. To have it lifted and be wholly accepted by my partner was nothing short of miraculous. It's entirely possible that had C not been a passionate co-conspirator that I might have taken myself right back into the closet.

## What's in a name?
Ahh, names. Look on any transgender forum and you'll see countless threads talking about what names to choose. It's such well-trodden ground that naming clichés have now developed among the trans community. My birth name was William, but for as long as I can possibly remember I had only ever gone by Bill. I felt a strong sense of ownership over the nickname, and the full form felt alien to me, long before I came out as trans. Heck, one of my favourite Doctor Who companions was a Bill! But it never felt quite like I belonged to it. I longed for something different, more feminine.

A major factor in choosing a name was that I wasn't ready to come out to the world just yet. I was only just ready to engage with this for myself, let alone the world at large. What if I was wrong? What if I weren't trans at all and I had to un-come out to everyone? The prospect was mortifying (more on that later), and not one I felt equipped to deal with back then. So, as with my ideas about adjusting stage outfits to be more feminine, I opted for the route of plausible deniability, and asked C to start calling me Billie. It was reasonable enough for my partner to have a slightly different name for me that they could say in front of others. And to the best of my knowledge, it went unchallenged.

And oh, what a difference it made. My fellow trans folks will be familiar with the concept of gender euphoria. And that extra syllable, those two little letters were enough to set me aglow with it for days. Almost three years and one heartbreak later, two memories still fill me with happy feelings. The first was the first time that C called to me from downstairs. I can still hear perfectly how their voice sang out the two syllables, the rhythm with which they spoke them, the exact pitch and duration of the utterance. And the second was a moment when, out of the blue, C sent me a flurry of texts, but the first one (and the only notification that showed up) was just the two words "**OMG, BILLIE!**"

Both memories send shivers of delight through me. On both of those occasions and on many afterwards, I felt a strong sense of belonging to my name which I hadn't ever experienced before. It was (and is) a wonderful feeling.


## Co-transition
As the weeks and months went by and I grew into my role of gendernaut, C began to have some of their own complex feelings about their own gender. It's not my place to talk about the details of their journey, it is enough to say they came out as nonbinary. C was far braver than I, and came out to their family much sooner after coming to terms with their identity than I managed to. It wasn't without difficulty, and there were a lot of challenging interactions in the ensuing months, rife with deadnaming and transphobia. That experience served to crank up the tension I felt over coming out to my own family quite significantly. But that is for another time.

C and I were now transitioning together. I envied C a great deal, as their queer identity seemed to come so much more easily to them than it did to me. But we helped and supported each other as best we could, exploring new styles of dress, names, and pronouns. It was an incredible comfort to have someone so close to me that was able to fully empathise with my experience. I like to think that I provided that for C as well.

Cracks began to form in our relationship when we moved in together. It was against my better judgement that I agreed to start cohabiting, and in hindsight I wasn't personally ready to be taking that step. It's different being a couple when you live in two different homes, and we found it hard to adjust to the routines that came with the other always being present. We both struggled to adapt to that circumstance, and how to navigate the changing expectations and needs of the relationship. I struggled more than C, I think, although C had their own difficulties with the change as well.

Exploring both of our genders meant that our sex life was shifting and changing quite a lot. What we felt we wanted and needed were changing more rapidly than either of us could keep up with. We weren't able to communicate about these changes, and many other rifts that were growing in the relationship in tandem with the slow deterioration of our sex life. We could both tell that there was something wrong with the relationship, and we toyed with the idea of going to couple's counselling, though it proved to be out of financial reach for us. We tried to have conversations exploring what was wrong, but one or the other of us would always end up shutting down. One final argument led to the relationship ending, and us agreeing to go our separate ways.

Suddenly I had lost my co-conspirator, and the rock of my transition. I felt cast adrift, and spent a couple of months miserable both as the result of the breakup, and the prospect of trying to date again as a trans woman.

## Temporary respite
C and I met for coffee a few months after the breakup, and what I had intended to be a plenary conversation ended more in the realms of reuniting. It would taste a lie to say that I hadn't hoped for a reconciliation, but I didn't dare dream that it might actually arrive. We talked for a long time about what went wrong. Looking back I think that was quite a toxic conversation, as I was shouldering the entire burden of responsibility for the breakdown in our relationship. Even as we agreed to tentatively try things out again, I was sewing the seeds of an even worse breakup to come.

Months passed, and we were happy for a lot of it. My transition was practically stalled. I knew I was a woman, and I had already successfully come out to a large portion of my friends (more on that next time). But I was still terrified to come out to my family. C for their part was in a much better place with their own family, although in the time we had been apart they told their parents and siblings about my own transition. That C had done so was a huge source of discomfort, and I felt a gnawing sense of resentment that they had told my story without my being ready for it to be told, and it wouldn't be the last time that happened either. If not content, I was at least comfortable with the status quo as it stood.

C and I continued to try and navigate the needs of a relationship that had morphed from a cis-het one into a deeply queer one. C was throwing themselves into queer culture, exploring drag and finding a crowd of queer friends, while I was finishing up a masters degree and barely had time to stay on top of my existing relationships and commitments without adding any more. Neither of us were particularly good communicators, and in hindsight both of our expectations and needs from the relationship shifted and morphed without either of us noticing. We stopped talking as much, and what conversations we did have about the relationship were strained at best. We had established so much groundwork in the relationship expecting each other to be a certain way, and now that that was changing we were not able to adapt as easily. That I think was in part because we were figuring ourselves out concurrently, and also in part to our respective neurodivergencies. Neither one of us was good at embracing lots of change all at once. Had we transitioned separately, or from a point of more stability in the rest of our lives (we were both starting new jobs, C had recently moved house), things might have ended up differently.

## Alone again
Of all the things to trigger a breakup, I never thought it would be a random YouTube video that the algorithm suggested. A short explanation of why relationships where one parter is avoidantly attached and the other anxiously attached are doomed to repeat the same cycles of pulling away and reconciling. I saw so much of myself in that description of avoidant behaviour, and all of the ways in which the avoidant acts in such a dynamic, it terrified me. I felt like I was doomed to forever hurt my partner. I struggled for a week to process these ideas, asking for some time away from C to try and clear my head. When we finally met up again, I had no intention of ending the relationship, but the more we talked, the more harsh the relief on our incompatibilities became. We had simply grown apart, embracing parts of ourselves that were suppressed when we first met, and finding that we were not the people we once were, and that our needs in a relationship were now just too different.

It was a painful breakup, a lot of harsh things were said. Personal attacks, words calculated to wound. I almost died driving home from exchanging possessions because I was experiencing the first panic attack of my life. All of the fears that I had from before about not having a rock, an ally, a dependable co-conspirator in my transition came back, and then some. All of the things C had said to me had cut me to my very heart, and I was in constant agony for a long, long time. However, the pain of the breakup was what finally allowed me to find the courage to come out to my parents, and the rest of my family. I knew that I couldn't ever have C back, or possibly even cope with seeing them again. I would have to forge onwards without their support. I couldn't hope to keep my transition from my family for much longer. And so with a shattered heart, I took a deep breath, and I made a plan to come out to my mum and dad.
